content/blog/creating-backup-usb.md, before:

---
title: "Creating Backup USB"
date: 2024-11-29T20:12:31-08:00
---


# Create Persistent Arch Linux USB Drive

This guide outlines the steps to create an Arch Linux USB drive with persistent storage, encryption, and the KDE Plasma desktop environment. It uses the archuseriso project from [https://github.com/laurent85v/archuseriso](https://github.com/laurent85v/archuseriso) It also includes NVIDIA GPU support.

I'm using the SSK USB 3.2 Gen 2 SSD drive (Amazon link: [https://a.co/d/4trb0kQ](https://a.co/d/4trb0kQ).

REQUIRED: The `archuseriso` package. I can install it from the Arch Linux aur using the `yay` tool:
```bash
yay -Syu archuseriso
```
---

## 1. Create the Arch Linux ISO with KDE and NVIDIA Graphics

I'll create a directory in `/opt`:
```bash
sudo mkdir /opt/aui
```

I'll use the `/opt/aui` directory to create the ISO file.

The `archuseriso` command `aui-mkiso` will create a customized Arch Linux ISO.
```bash
sudo aui-mkiso kde --verbose --graphics=nvidia
```

- `kde`: This is the profile. It will create an ISO with the KDE Plasma desktop environment.
- `--graphics=nvidia`: Adds NVIDIA drivers for my laptop's GPU.
- `--verbose`: Enables detailed output for troubleshooting.

When I ran this today (Nov 30, 2024), I got an error about a missing target:

```bash
error: target not found: libva-vdpau-driver
```

That's a driver for the [Video Decode and Presentation API for Unix (VDPAU)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VDPAU). According to the Arch Linux Wiki on [Hardware video accelleration](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Hardware_video_acceleration):

*The code for libva-vdpau-driver has not been touched for years. As a result, it crashes when running VLC or OBS with recent versions of the NVIDIA driver. If you need a translation layer for NVIDIA drivers, use libva-nvidia-driver instead.*

I can ignore this package, and rerun the ISO creation, because it's not essential. I'll be installing NVIDIA drivers with the `--graphics=nvidia` option.

First, I'll edit the packages configuration for the KDE profile I'm using:
```bash
sudo vim /usr/share/archuseriso/profiles/kde/packages.x86_64
```

I'll comment out the line mentioning `libva-vdpau-driver`, and save it.

There will probably be a process running at `/opt/aui/work/x86_64/airootfs/proc`. I'll unmount:
```bash
sudo umount work/x86_64/airootfs/proc
```

And delete the `work` directory that was created:

```bash
sudo rm -fr work/
```

I'll rerun the command:

```bash
sudo aui-mkiso kde --verbose --graphics=nvidia
```

After a couple of minutes, this produces an ISO file in the `out` directory. I'll use that on my USB drive.

---

## 2. Plug in Your USB Drive

Insert your USB drive into your computer.

Verify the USB drive is detected and confirm the correct device name (something like `/dev/sda` or `/dev/sdb`):

```bash
lsblk
```

---

## 3. Verify the Partition Table Type

Check the partition table on the USB drive:

```bash
sudo fdisk -l /dev/sda
```

Look for `Disklabel type: dos` (for MBR) or `Disklabel type: gpt`.

If the drive uses MBR, I can convert it to GPT using the `parted` command.

I'll start `parted`:
```bash
sudo parted /dev/sda
```

Then, create a new GPT partition table:
```bash
mklabel gpt
```

And, finally, I'll exit `parted`:
```bash
quit
```

---


## 4. Install Arch Linux on the USB

Use the `aui-mkusb` command to install the Arch Linux ISO on the USB drive. 

```bash
    sudo aui-mkusb out/aui-kde*.iso /dev/sda --encrypt --size-cow=200G
```

This will:

- Create three partitions (including an EFI partition).
- Enable encryption for the system.
- Allocate 200 GB for the persistent copy-on-write (COW) partition.

---

## 5. Verify Partitions

List the block devices again to confirm the three partitions created by `aui-mkusb`.

```bash
lsblk
```

You should see:

1. EFI partition (e.g., `/dev/sda1`).
2. Root filesystem partition.
3. Persistent COW partition.

---

## 6. Create a Fourth Partition For Backup Storage
I want to create a fourth partition that will be encrypted. I'll use that for backing up files.

Use `cfdisk` to allocate the remaining space as a fourth partition.

1. Launch `cfdisk`:
```bash
sudo cfdisk /dev/sda
```

2. Select the free space.
3. Create a new partition using the remaining space.
4. Write changes and exit.

---

## 7. Initialize the Fourth Partition with LUKS (Encrypt It)

Format the newly created fourth partition (`/dev/sda4`) as a LUKS-encrypted partition:

```bash
    sudo cryptsetup luksFormat /dev/sda4
```

This is using all the default options. The Arch Linux Wiki has a section describing the different options at [https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/Device_encryption#Encryption_options_for_LUKS_mode](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/Device_encryption#Encryption_options_for_LUKS_mode). For instance, you can increase the time spent processing the passphrase from the default 5000 miliseconds (5 seconds) to 8000 by adding the option `--iter-time 8000`.

I set a passphrase for the encrypted partition. If I lose it, I won't be able to decrypt it. So it should be something I can remember.

---

## 8. Open the Encrypted Partition

Map the encrypted partition to `/dev/mapper/cryptusb`:

```bash
    sudo cryptsetup open /dev/sda4 cryptusb
```

---

## 9. Format the Encrypted Partition

Format the unencrypted mapped device with the `ext4` filesystem:

```bash
sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/cryptusb
```

---

## 10. Verify the Partition Structure

Check the block devices again to confirm the setup:

```bash
lsblk
```

The encrypted partition should appear as `/dev/mapper/cryptusb`.

---

## 11. Mount the Encrypted Partition

Mount the unencrypted partition to `/mnt/cryptusb`, creating the directory if it doesn't exist:

```bash
sudo mount --mkdir /dev/mapper/cryptusb /mnt/cryptusb/
```

---

## 12. Write a Test File

Create a test file in the mounted partition to verify functionality:

```bash
sudo vim /mnt/cryptusb/secret.txt
```

---

## 13. Unmount the Partition

Unmount the encrypted partition when finished:

```bash
sudo umount /mnt/cryptusb
```

---

## 14. Close the Encrypted Partition

Remove the mapping for the encrypted partition:

```bash
sudo cryptsetup close cryptusb
```
---

Now, to test it out, I can reboot my laptop and boot from the USB drive. It should have Arch Linux installed. It has a user account called `live`, but there's not password for it. I can set it with the `passwd` command.

Then, I can make changes to the system, and it will persist on the USB drive.

I can also use that fourth encrypted partition for backing up files.

## Final Notes

- Ensure the USB drive is correctly identified (e.g., `/dev/sda`) before executing commands to avoid overwriting another device.
- The process assumes the USB drive starts with an MBR partition table and is converted to GPT as part of this guide.
- The `aui-mkusb` command handles creating the EFI partition and other required partitions for the Arch Linux installation.

Commit message:

adds mount and chroot steps to usb drive blog post

content/blog/creating-backup-usb.md, after:

---
title: "Creating Backup USB"
date: 2024-11-29T20:12:31-08:00
---


# Create Persistent Arch Linux USB Drive

This guide outlines the steps to create an Arch Linux USB drive with persistent storage, encryption, and the KDE Plasma desktop environment. It uses the archuseriso project from [https://github.com/laurent85v/archuseriso](https://github.com/laurent85v/archuseriso) It also includes NVIDIA GPU support.

I'm using the SSK USB 3.2 Gen 2 SSD drive (Amazon link: [https://a.co/d/4trb0kQ](https://a.co/d/4trb0kQ).

REQUIRED: The `archuseriso` package. I can install it from the Arch Linux aur using the `yay` tool:
```bash
yay -Syu archuseriso
```
---

## 1. Create the Arch Linux ISO with KDE and NVIDIA Graphics

I'll create a directory in `/opt`:
```bash
sudo mkdir /opt/aui
```

I'll use the `/opt/aui` directory to create the ISO file.

The `archuseriso` command `aui-mkiso` will create a customized Arch Linux ISO.
```bash
sudo aui-mkiso kde --verbose --graphics=nvidia
```

- `kde`: This is the profile. It will create an ISO with the KDE Plasma desktop environment.
- `--graphics=nvidia`: Adds NVIDIA drivers for my laptop's GPU.
- `--verbose`: Enables detailed output for troubleshooting.

When I ran this today (Nov 30, 2024), I got an error about a missing target:

```bash
error: target not found: libva-vdpau-driver
```

That's a driver for the [Video Decode and Presentation API for Unix (VDPAU)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VDPAU). According to the Arch Linux Wiki on [Hardware video accelleration](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Hardware_video_acceleration):

*The code for libva-vdpau-driver has not been touched for years. As a result, it crashes when running VLC or OBS with recent versions of the NVIDIA driver. If you need a translation layer for NVIDIA drivers, use libva-nvidia-driver instead.*

I can ignore this package, and rerun the ISO creation, because it's not essential. I'll be installing NVIDIA drivers with the `--graphics=nvidia` option.

First, I'll edit the packages configuration for the KDE profile I'm using:
```bash
sudo vim /usr/share/archuseriso/profiles/kde/packages.x86_64
```

I'll comment out the line mentioning `libva-vdpau-driver`, and save it.

There will probably be a process running at `/opt/aui/work/x86_64/airootfs/proc`. I'll unmount:
```bash
sudo umount work/x86_64/airootfs/proc
```

And delete the `work` directory that was created:

```bash
sudo rm -fr work/
```

I'll rerun the command:

```bash
sudo aui-mkiso kde --verbose --graphics=nvidia
```

After a couple of minutes, this produces an ISO file in the `out` directory. I'll use that on my USB drive.

---

## 2. Plug in Your USB Drive

Insert your USB drive into your computer.

Verify the USB drive is detected and confirm the correct device name (something like `/dev/sda` or `/dev/sdb`):

```bash
lsblk
```

---

## 3. Verify the Partition Table Type

Check the partition table on the USB drive:

```bash
sudo fdisk -l /dev/sda
```

Look for `Disklabel type: dos` (for MBR) or `Disklabel type: gpt`.

If the drive uses MBR, I can convert it to GPT using the `parted` command.

I'll start `parted`:
```bash
sudo parted /dev/sda
```

Then, create a new GPT partition table:
```bash
mklabel gpt
```

And, finally, I'll exit `parted`:
```bash
quit
```

---


## 4. Install Arch Linux on the USB

Use the `aui-mkusb` command to install the Arch Linux ISO on the USB drive. 

```bash
    sudo aui-mkusb out/aui-kde*.iso /dev/sda --encrypt --size-cow=200G
```

This will:

- Create three partitions (including an EFI partition).
- Enable encryption for the system.
- Allocate 200 GB for the persistent copy-on-write (COW) partition.

---

## 5. Verify Partitions

List the block devices again to confirm the three partitions created by `aui-mkusb`.

```bash
lsblk
```

You should see:

1. EFI partition (e.g., `/dev/sda1`).
2. Root filesystem partition.
3. Persistent COW partition.

---

## 6. Create a Fourth Partition For Backup Storage
I want to create a fourth partition that will be encrypted. I'll use that for backing up files.

Use `cfdisk` to allocate the remaining space as a fourth partition.

1. Launch `cfdisk`:
```bash
sudo cfdisk /dev/sda
```

2. Select the free space.
3. Create a new partition using the remaining space.
4. Write changes and exit.

---

## 7. Initialize the Fourth Partition with LUKS (Encrypt It)

Format the newly created fourth partition (`/dev/sda4`) as a LUKS-encrypted partition:

```bash
    sudo cryptsetup luksFormat /dev/sda4
```

This is using all the default options. The Arch Linux Wiki has a section describing the different options at [https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/Device_encryption#Encryption_options_for_LUKS_mode](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/Device_encryption#Encryption_options_for_LUKS_mode). For instance, you can increase the time spent processing the passphrase from the default 5000 miliseconds (5 seconds) to 8000 by adding the option `--iter-time 8000`.

I set a passphrase for the encrypted partition. If I lose it, I won't be able to decrypt it. So it should be something I can remember.

---

## 8. Open the Encrypted Partition

Map the encrypted partition to `/dev/mapper/cryptusb`:

```bash
    sudo cryptsetup open /dev/sda4 cryptusb
```

---

## 9. Format the Encrypted Partition

Format the unencrypted mapped device with the `ext4` filesystem:

```bash
sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/cryptusb
```

---

## 10. Verify the Partition Structure

Check the block devices again to confirm the setup:

```bash
lsblk
```

The encrypted partition should appear as `/dev/mapper/cryptusb`.

---

## 11. Mount the Encrypted Partition

Mount the unencrypted partition to `/mnt/cryptusb`, creating the directory if it doesn't exist:

```bash
sudo mount --mkdir /dev/mapper/cryptusb /mnt/cryptusb/
```

---

## 12. Write a Test File

Create a test file in the mounted partition to verify functionality:

```bash
sudo vim /mnt/cryptusb/secret.txt
```

---

## 13. Unmount the Partition

Unmount the encrypted partition when finished:

```bash
sudo umount /mnt/cryptusb
```

---

## 14. Close the Encrypted Partition

Remove the mapping for the encrypted partition:

```bash
sudo cryptsetup close cryptusb
```
---

## 15. Reboot To USB Drive

Now, to test it out, I can reboot my laptop and boot from the USB drive. It should have Arch Linux installed. It has a user account called `live`, but there's not password for it. I can set it with the `passwd` command.

Then, I can make changes to the system, and it will persist on the USB drive. If I'm having trouble with my laptop, I can boot from the USB drive and access the laptop hard drive by using the [arch-chroot](https://man.archlinux.org/man/arch-chroot.8) script.

So, for example, if my root partition is unencrypted and on the block device `/dev/nvme0n1p2`, I can mount it to the `/mnt/crypthd` directory:
```bash
sudo mount --mkdir /dev/nvme0n1p2 /mnt/crypthd
```

My laptop's hard drive is encrypted, so I can decrypt it and map it:
```bash
sudo cryptsetup open /dev/nvme0n1p2 crypthd
```

Then mount it:
```bash
sudo mount --mkdir /dev/mapper/crypthd /mnt/crypthd
```

When it's mounted, I can use the script `arch-chroot` to change my root to the laptop's root filesystem:
```bash
sudo arch-chroot /mnt/crypthd
```

## Final Notes

- Ensure the USB drive is correctly identified (e.g., `/dev/sda`) before executing commands to avoid overwriting another device.
- The process assumes the USB drive starts with an MBR partition table and is converted to GPT as part of this guide.
- The `aui-mkusb` command handles creating the EFI partition and other required partitions for the Arch Linux installation.
